
### Exploiting WiFi Networks for Contact Tracing by Sensing Mobility Patterns 

**WiFiTrace** is a **server side ready to deploy tool** that uses Enterprise WiFi logs for contact tracing. A Server side tool means there is no need to install any battery draining apps on the mobile phones of users or periodically gather location data. 

### WiFiTrace Pros:
* Server Side Tool Ready to Deploy
* No need to install any battery draining apps on user mobile phones
* No active monitoring/recording needed
* No need to install sensors or perform infrastructure upgrade
* No laborious fingerprinting of existing infrastructure needed.

### WiFiTrace Features:

* Infected Person location visit report
* Co-locators summary report (list of co-locators with duration and location of co-location)
* Detail Co-location report of each co-locator
* Capability to identify user visits to locations with active pathogens even after patient departure from the location
* Configurable Patient visit duration parameter
* Configurable pathogen activity parameter

WiFiTrace is a complete solution including reporting functionality for listing locations visited by an infected patient, co-location reporting of other users with the infected patient, configurable timing for pathogen active time period, configurable constraints on patient visit durations, implementation on a Enterprise WiFi Network; and extensive evaluation under many conditions including varying pathogen time window, patient visit durations.

### How is WiFiTrace different from other apps and tools?

Many tools and apps have been developed for contact tracing using bluetooth, GPS, and self/active recording of locations visited by users. Despite a plethora of apps, we lack a method to perform passive contact tracing without installing any apps on mobile devices or actively mapping locations.

WiFiTrace has the capability to perform contact tracing of patients with users co-located at the same place and same time and also to identify users who visited the location after the departure of the infected person while the pathogens spread by the infected person are still alive.

WiFiTrace uses WiFi logs generated by Access Points in an enterprise WiFi network resulting in no new deployment of any sensors, need for fingerprinting buildings or geographic locations. Read on to find out how WiFiTrace works.


### How does WiFiTrace Work?

Today, WiFi networks are ubiquitous in office environments, campus, malls, cafes and some cities. Users carry mobile devices (phone, ipad, laptop) with them that are connected to the Wifi network. Mobile devices (phones, tablets, laptops) generate event messages when connecting or disconnecting to the access point (AP) in an enterprise WiFi network. These event messages provide information about the locations visited by a user and we use this information to determine who else was present at those locations at specific times and help with contact tracing. [Our research](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08512) has shown that mobility patterns (i.e., locations visited by the device) are a good proxy for the user’s mobility (locations visited by the user). Enterprise WiFi networks log information when a device connects to an AP, which indicates that the device and the user are in the vicinity of the access point. As the device/user moves, they connect to different access points and their mobility pattern over the course of a day or multiple days can be analyzed.
We use the WiFi logs from all the APs to generate device/user mobility and then use these device/user mobility trajectory to identify other individuals/devices that were co-located either at the same time or within the activity period of the pathogens at the locations visited by the patient.
